Add guide for migrating queries for backend datasources (#1249)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/how-to-guides/data-source-plugins/add-migration-handler-for-backend.md

This guide walks you through the steps necessary to use the latest tooling to automatically migrate queries and avoid duplicating code.

For the last step in this guide, there are two suggested approaches. The first one requires that Grafana to be configured to run data source as standalone API servers, this behavior is currently behind the feature flag [grafanaAPIServerWithExperimentalAPIs](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/3457f219be1c8bce99f713d7a907ee339ef38229/pkg/services/featuremgmt/registry.go#L519) and also requires to run on a Grafana version bigger or equal to 11.4. The second approach requires more boilerplate code but uses stable APIs that can be used in any recent Grafana version.

> Also, it’s not the goal of this migration system to support two-way migrations. Only forward migrations are supported. Migrations are not automatically persisted, users need to manually save changes to ensure the migration works as expected. 

Reviewer: Maybe turn this into a note?

# Step 1 (optional): Add a query schema

First of all, plugins don’t need to have strongly typed queries. While this lowers the barrier for plugin development, plugins that don’t define types are harder to scale and maintain. The first step in this guide is to add the required files to define the plugin query.

See the following example: [grafana-plugin-examples#400](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/pull/400). As you can see, there are multiple files to create. These will be used for both generating OpenAPI documentation and validating that the received queries are valid:

 - `query.go`: This file defines the Golang types for your query. For automatic migrations to work, it’s important that your query extends the new `v0alpha1.CommonQueryProperties`. After that, just define your query custom properties.
 - `query_test.go`: This test file is both used to check that all the JSON files are up to date with the query model and to generate them. The first time you execute the test, it will generate these files (take into account that query.types.json needs to exist, even if empty).

>  - `query.*.json`: Automatically generated files. These schemas will be used for OpenAPI documentation. This is a feature in progress that is still not available for external plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `query.*.json`: Automatically generated files. These schemas will be used for OpenAPI documentation. This is a feature in progress only available to plugins developed by Grafana Labs.
```

Author: it's not really Grafana plugins, atm is only core plugins, and is only enabled for a hardcoded list. I'll rephrase this.

## Why add query migration handlers

To ensure compatibility and maintain seamless performance, query migration handlers transform legacy queries into the current format. This approach allows you to deliver updates without breaking existing queries or duplicating code, offering users a smooth transition when they update your plugin.

## Before you begin

Depending on the approach you take for performing [one of the steps](#step-5-use-migration-code-from-the-frontend-using-experimental-apis) in this guide, you may need to fulfill certain prerequisites. These prerequisites are:

1. Grafana must be configured to run data sources as standalone API servers, a behavior which is behind the feature flag [grafanaAPIServerWithExperimentalAPIs](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/3457f219be1c8bce99f713d7a907ee339ef38229/pkg/services/featuremgmt/registry.go#L519).
1. The plugin must be run on a Grafana version 11.4 or later.

> More information about these prerequisites is found in [step 5](#step-5-use-migration-code-from-the-frontend-using-experimental-apis) but if your plugin can't adhere to these requirements, there is an alternative approach using existing APIs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More information about these prerequisites is found in [step 5](#step-5-use-migration-code-from-the-frontend-using-experimental-apis) but if your plugin can't adhere to these requirements, there is an [alternative approach](#run-migrations-using-legacy-apis) using existing APIs
```

> More information about these prerequisites is found in [step 5](#step-5-use-migration-code-from-the-frontend-using-experimental-apis) but if your plugin can't adhere to these requirements, there is an [alternative approach](#step-5-alternative-run-migrations-using-legacy-apis) using existing APIs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
More information about these prerequisites is found in [step 5](#step-5-use-migration-code-from-the-frontend-using-experimental-apis), but if your plugin can't adhere to these requirements, there is an [alternative approach](#step-5-alternative-run-migrations-using-legacy-apis) using existing APIs.
```

## Implement a backend migration handler

To implement a backend migration handler, add migration logic in your backend code. This guide walks you through the steps necessary to use the latest tooling to automatically migrate queries and avoid duplicating code.

:::note

The migration system detailed in this guide doesn't support two-way migrations. Only forward migrations are covered. Query migrations aren't automatically persisted, so users need to manually save changes to ensure the process works as expected.

:::

### Step 1 (optional): Add a query schema

First of all, plugins don't need to have strongly typed queries. While this lowers the barrier for plugin development, plugins that don't define types are harder to scale and maintain. The first step in this guide is to add the required files to define the plugin query.

> See the following example: [grafana-plugin-examples#400](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/pull/400). As you can see, there are multiple files to create. These files are used for both generating OpenAPI documentation and validating that the received queries are valid.

Reviewer 2: > These files are used for both generating OpenAPI documentation

Can we link to something that explains where it can be used / found?

Author: Not really, it's explained below: "These schemas can be used for OpenAPI documentation, but it's a feature still in progress that isn't available yet". I can move that caveat here.

> See the following example: [grafana-plugin-examples#400](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/pull/400). As you can see, there are multiple files to create. These files will be used for both generating OpenAPI documentation and validating that the received queries are valid but it's a feature still in progress that isn't available yet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See the following example: [grafana-plugin-examples#400](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/pull/400). As you can see, there are multiple files to create. These files will be used for both generating OpenAPI documentation and validating that the received queries are valid (but it's a feature still in progress that isn't available yet).
```

Create these files:

- `query.go`: This file defines the Golang types for your query. For automatic migrations to work, it's important that your query extends the new `v0alpha1.CommonQueryProperties`. After that, just define your query custom properties.
- `query_test.go`: This test file is both used to check that all the JSON files are up to date with the query model and to generate them. The first time you execute the test, it will generate these files (so take into account that `query.types.json` needs to exist, even if it's empty).
- `query.*.json`: Automatically generated files. These schemas can be used for OpenAPI documentation, but it's a feature still in progress that isn't available yet.

### Step 2: Changing the query model

:::note

For a complete example of how to add a query migration (steps 2, 3 and 4), refer to the code for [experimental APIs](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/pull/403/files) or [stable APIs](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/pull/407).

:::

> Once your plugin has its own schemas, add the model change. Since queries within the major version (or same API version) need to be compatible, maintain a reference to the legacy data format. This reference helps to enable an easy migration path.

Reviewer 2: I think this paragraph is a bit hard to read, maybe something like this would be a bit easier to understand for the first time readers:

```suggestion
Once your plugin has its own schemas, you can start introducing model changes. Since queries within the major version (or same API version) need to be compatible, you have to maintain a reference to the legacy data format. This reference helps you to enable an easy migration path.
```

> Once your plugin has its own schemas, you can start introducing model changes. Since queries within the major version (or same API version) need to be compatible, you have to maintain a reference to the legacy data format. This reference also helps you to enable an easy migration path.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once your plugin has its own schemas, start introducing model changes. Since queries within the major version (or same API version) need to be compatible, maintain a reference to the legacy data format. This reference also helps to enable an easy migration path.
```

For example, let's assume that you want to change the query format of your plugin and the `Multiplier` property that you were using is changing to `Multiply` like so:

```patch
 type DataQuery struct {
        v0alpha1.CommonQueryProperties

-       // Multiplier is the number to multiply the input by
+       // Multiply is the number to multiply the input by
+       Multiply int `json:"multiply,omitempty"`
+
+       // Deprecated: Use Multiply instead
        Multiplier int `json:"multiplier,omitempty"`
 }
```

In this example, you can regenerate the schema running the test in `query_test.go` so your new data type will become ready to be used.

> Note that we haven't yet made a breaking change because all new parameters (in this case `Multiply`) are marked as optional. Also, we haven't modified any of the business logic, so everything should work as before, using the deprecated property. We're going to actually make a breaking change in the next step.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that there is not yet a breaking change because all the new parameters (in this case `Multiply`) are marked as optional. Also, none of the other business logic has been modified, so everything should work as before, using the deprecated property. In the next step, there is actually a breaking change. 
```

Finally, adapt the frontend so `@grafana/runtime` knows if it should run the migration action. Do this in two steps:

1. Implement the `MigrationHandler` that `@grafana/runtime` exposes in the plugin's `DataSource` class. Set the property `hasBackendMigration` (to `true`) and implement the function `shouldMigrate`. The `shouldMigrate` function receives a query and verifies if it requires migration (for example, by checking the latest properties or checking the expected plugin version, if it's part of the model). This verification avoids unnecessary queries to the backend.
1. Use the wrapper `QueryEditorWithMigration` along with your `QueryEditor` component. This wrapper will ensure that the query is migrated before rendering the editor.

That's it. Once the plugin implements these steps, existing and new queries will continue working without the need for duplicate migration logic in multiple places.

:::note

To see how steps 2 to 5 are done in a complete example, refer to [this example](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/pull/403/files).

:::

> #### Run migrations using legacy APIs

Reviewer 2: I am not sure that this section is marked clearly that it is an alternative not an additional step to run in Step 5.

Author: I agree (more after seeing the preview). Before I had this at the same level than `Step 5`. I had this as `Step 5'`, which is maybe a confusing notation 😅 . @josmperez suggested this. Let me propose `Step 5 (alternative): ...`. I think that will be more clear.

Reviewer 3: Step 5 (alternative) is good. unfortunately h4s look only link regular bold text in our style sheet. we should really redefine styles for h4 to make them pop out.

:::note

To see how steps 2 to 5 are done in a complete example, refer to [this example](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/pull/407).

:::

### Step 6 (Optional): Add an AdmissionHandler

:::note

This step is optional. It's only needed if you're running Grafana with the feature flag [grafanaAPIServerWithExperimentalAPIs](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/3457f219be1c8bce99f713d7a907ee339ef38229/pkg/services/featuremgmt/registry.go#L519).

:::

When running Grafana with experimental APIs, each data source will run as an isolated API server. This means that queries will be routed to a server such as `https://<grafana-host>/apis/<datasource>.datasource.grafana.app/v0alpha1/namespaces/stack-1/connections/<uid>/query`.

In this scenario, and to ensure that your plugin runs with the expected API version (`v0alpha1` at the beginning), implement an `AdmissionHandler`. This `AdmissionHandler` ensures that the given data source settings satisfy what's expected for the running API version, and therefore they can handle queries for that API version.

> This step isn't mandatory while the plugin is at `v0*`, but it is mandatory once the plugin reaches `v1`. At the moment, it's used to [validate data source settings when saving them](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/a46ff09bf91895ee3de0d8f6c4ab88d70b47bfe6/pkg/services/datasources/service/datasource.go#L373).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This step isn't mandatory while the plugin is at `v0*`, but it's mandatory once the plugin reaches `v1`. At the moment, it's used to [validate data source settings when saving them](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/a46ff09bf91895ee3de0d8f6c4ab88d70b47bfe6/pkg/services/datasources/service/datasource.go#L373).
```
